They were born in Pakistan and I moved to England in the 1960s and since then been here.
My children are born here, I was married in Pakistan, my wife and children are here, they're all grown up.
Coming over to Newport in the 60s, how old were you when you came over?
I was just about 15 when I came over and actually in those days, you know, I wasn't mature enough to know what was going on.
Because I was still in school and there was no sort of limit to what age you can go to school.
When I came here, I was over the age to go and stay in school. I only spent about 3-4 months in school.
And then I tried to get into college but those days there was no sort of evening or any classes where I could join because my English wasn't high enough to join anything.
I had to go and work which was very good at that time.
I don't know if it was one of the first jobs that you got when you were here, was it driving a bus?
No, the first job I got was in the timber factory down in Pail. It's a sawmill, I think it's still there.
I worked there for about a year. Then I went to work in the board mill, Mahamasha board mill.
And I worked there about 8-9 months. And I went to work in the battery factory.
I worked there for about 3-4 months.
And then I worked for about 2 days in the buildings outside of Paz, Calif.
Then I came to work, looked for a job in the buses and I got the job in the buses.
And that was the last job I had. And after that I had health problems.
And they retired me in paternity.
In those days I think there was a shortage of workforce in England because of the
world war. And they wanted people to come from, I think, what happened.
To my knowledge, I don't know, I might be wrong, because of the independence of India and Pakistan.
Few years before they wanted people to come over and help out or carry on their life with the community living here.
So my parents came over and I just came with them.
And since then we just settled down here. Now I get my grandchildren growing up here as well.
Happy, everybody's happy living here with the community. But things have changed.
Like, you know, you can't say, when I came over there was lots of work.
You could go anywhere and find work. The work is done. Most of the factories in Nepal are gone.
And it is, I think, it's a bit difficult for the youngsters to get a job now unless they got a good
qualification. And then there is just office work, I think. Office work,
warehouse or shop works left in Nepal now. It's not much industry.
I don't know where the future is going to be.
I don't know where the future is going to be. As you can see around,
you know, when I came over you could finish one job in the morning and you have another
job in the afternoon. They will start you up, you know, so you go and look for a job.
They wouldn't say no, come back tomorrow. They said, all right, come and start now.
So, that was the situation then. Very different.
It's very difficult now to get a job. When you first moved into the area,
did you live close by to the community house? Yes, the community also did play a big part in
my life because, as I said in the beginning, in that time there was no, I wanted to learn
and there was no classes I could join. But there was people in the community also used to come
once a week to teach English. There was two teachers from different schools. One of them moved to
Germany after and the one stayed here. They helped us. There was a group of us, the boys,
who used to come here, play around and meet and learn English as well.
And then after that, quite a few people came and helped, you know,
learn and just carry on with the things. I guess also when you were working on the buses,
you were meeting people every day and that must have improved your English.
That helped as well to learn and speak. But the main point which I learned from is the community
house, which we had a couple of different people at the time coming over. And after the teachers,
they were here for a while. Then somebody else took over. The three girls who were studying as
trainee teachers, they came over. One from Rondawali and I think the other one was from either
Manchester or Lied. The two or three of them, they were good friends. They came over and they
used to come over every Thursday and Tuesday, twice a week, to teach whoever wanted to learn.
Mr. Summers, who was the bishop of the church, he lived next door. His daughter,
and Brian, and Mrs. Jones, who used to run the cafe here. They were very friendly people,
very, very friendly and very, very helpful. And we had a good group of people from different
nationalities and different cultures. So we had a good time here.
I can see on the film, there's some really nice footage of you all having a nice
party and coffee bar and having a dance, like Scottish dancing.
It was like a sort of a get together sort of thing. It was quite nice, good day, good times.
There was good time, good friendly times. People from all walks of their life.
There was not just Pakistani or English. There was people from all other communities.
There was people from France and Africa. There was others, I just can't remember now.
There's quite a lot of people. Everybody was quite happy to get together and help each other.
And do you remember any special evening? Like you say you have Thursday evening.
Was that a thing, Thursday evening in particular?
No, it was just two days. We had Tuesday and Thursday, which was available. The hall was
available. The community was also available. And people just got together and we just talked.
We had English classes. We had a play group playing tennis.
Then there was other sort of game table tennis. Another small
food table. And also the game playing. It was to call the Asian club.
And then it became the international club. And that's how it carried on.
Then Ingrid Wilson who joined us. She did quite a lot. Her husband as well.
He was here as well. Mr. Wilson. They both sort of helped to run the community group.
There was other people like we just sort of got on with it.
Ingrid is still very much involved.
She is still very much involved. She still comes. But
I don't have much time now because my wife is quite ill now. And I spend most time
staying home, taking her hair and there. And life is quite busy at home.
Kind of my time.
I got my daughter-in-law. My daughters, they are very good. They help out. They do most of the
things. But because my daughter and my son, they are mostly working. And I'm home because I'm
retired quite a while now. And I am retired officially now two years ago as well. So I do
get out and about. But not a lot because my own health is not all that good.
Oh, I'm sorry to hear that.
I've been suffering for quite a while now with this anxiety and distressions and back problem.
So thank God I'm able to get around.
Yes.
I can get about. But not a lot. I spend the time at home mostly now.
Did you enjoy your work as a bus driver?
Oh, I love it. If I had a chance to go back.
How many years would you say you were doing that job?
On and off. I was about 10, 15 years altogether because I was working from 70 to 74.
74 years. End of 74 I go up, went back home to get married, come back, went to work in
Cardiff for a year. Then I came back to Newport. And after that I became ill and I was unable to
carry on then.
What did you like most about the job?
Meeting people. Meeting different people. And I go all the time. It was the best point was
meeting people, different people all the time. And very friendly people. Group of people to work
with as well.
When you look back at your film Home From Home, when was the last time you saw it?
Not long ago. It was shown in Sendmite, Riverside. My family went to see it.
And they also have it put on the internet. And my son showed it to me on the internet.
At home we all watched it at home.
Did you like to see yourself? Did you think it was a good representation of your life?
It was a very good representation. But as I said I was young and naive those days. Just the things
could have been better if I had known what I was doing. But at the time what we did and what we made
was quite good. And it's quite helpful.
Yeah it is very interesting always to look at old films to see what people were wearing,
what the traffic was doing, the shops. It was fascinating. I got the feeling that you were
lonely. It was a street scene at the end and you're walking off in the distance and the street's
empty. There's no traffic and it's just you walking away. And I thought, oh that looks very
poignant.
Just the scene he wanted to create some reason or other. Because maybe to show I was, I don't know
what he meant with that. At that time I said, like I said, it didn't come to my mind what
we were doing or what it was about. It was just about what the life was in the UK.
That's what it was all about. Getting family together and spending time together.
And the shop with the street. There's some sort of band, a marching band.
Because that was the lifestyle those days. You could see bands marching and every time.
You don't see them now. It's gone. You don't see them anymore.
People used to go to church and every Sunday it's gone. Every Sunday you wake up, you hear the bells
going. You don't hear the bells no more. I think people are just going away from that religion.
It's just life is, I don't know, hustle and bustle. Too much.
The life is so expensive I think that's why it is. And there's not much work. People are just,
I don't know. It's just I think this life is changed altogether to what it was in the 60s and 70s.
Life has become very, people have become more busy in their phones and internet and tablets.
See the children, they're mostly busy. They've got their headphones on, the phone going.
They're more interested in their iPad or phone instead of
being together. That closeness of families, it sort of seems to be, I don't know,
it seems to be dying away in the family. It's just me or it's happening every day, I don't know.
I got that feeling that we are coming to this situation where
people are becoming more selfish and this more problem, world is becoming,
has become more problematic. You see people killing each other. We're in the 70s and after
World War, everybody was trying to make friendship and build up the relationships. And I don't know,
we're going back instead of going forward because
it's every, every day is trouble. Yeah, we live in some very interesting times.
The social media is creating more problem because everybody's putting up so much rubbish
into young people's minds. It's too busy, it's too crowded. That's it. Yeah. Everyone seems to be
switched on all the time. There's no escaping it. It feels like you can fill your every waking hour.
People don't slow down anymore. No, no. It's everything is like
we have before people used to get together, meet, family used to sit in one room.
I remember when my children and myself and my wife in the evening, children came from school,
I come from work, we all sat down in one room. We had our food together. We sat and watched TV
for a while together. Now it's all different. The children come from school, they take their food
up in their bedrooms, next room, they just don't seem to be that
they're not. The families sort of life, what maybe is a new generation as their way of life,
completely different to ours. Maybe that's what it is, you know. Life, you know. Makes you want to
think, you know, what we was and what it is now in the last 15, 20 years. This is
completely changed. The things are completely changed.
It's the, I don't know,
you know. There's no that feeling of getting together. Maybe it's me getting old, maybe it's
the old age, you know. I don't know, it could be. It's maybe me. No, yes, it is. Yes, it is.
Because I don't know, like I said, that, you know, the people, they were more interested in
religion at that time, not so long ago. People used to come to the church here as well because
they used to have Sunday service and also in the other churches. The people, this day and age,
they can't wait for the religion of the churches, which sort of had a big bond in the people.
Because when you went to church, there was other people there. You met them,
they listened to the lecture from the vicar or whoever was in charge of the church.
And people sort of have some thing to take some thought back home. Now everybody is into internet.
And whatever you see in the internet or social media, that is being fed into the minds of people.
People are not interested into the groups or the churches. As everybody might have noticed,
the churches are closed down. Some have been knocked down, some been sold because people
are not interested. So that's what I think is breaking up the, how do you call it,
bond in the people like what we had when we was growing up or when we was in our
growing up days. It's not the same.
It's a shame. It's a shame really. I don't know, maybe youngsters, maybe they have more
activities than what we had. But because it's maybe because I'm most of the time I'm home,
I don't go almost much out and about. That's maybe, I don't know. Maybe that's the problem that I
don't see it was like as a community host. Like you said, it must remain open to the community.
Like there are different groups every day, different
activities going on afternoon and evenings. I don't even know what's going on here now.
Because it's been a long time since I come to community house.
There's a women's group, there's a men's group that happens today from two till four every
Tuesday. It's quite a nice group. Just a few men that will sit there and they will have chat and
have a cup of tea and play cards. And they seem very friendly. And then there's a coffee group
on a Thursday and then there's a main youth project that happens tonight, but they finished now.
There's all kinds of things. I think what the project, the purpose of this project that I'm
involved in, we won Heritage Lottery money over two years. And we won a bid. Originally it was
going to be for repairs to the building, but then the Heritage Lottery looked at the building and
they thought that it didn't, you know, it wasn't significant. If it was that old church building
that used to stand here with the Victorian brick gothic style, if it was that, then maybe they
would have given us money for the renovation of the building. But what captured their attention
most of all was the way that they heard about Cyril Somers and his vision for community
and how he thought about rebuilding the church once they knew that the old building had to be
demolished. And Cyril's idea was looking at the changing area mainly and seeing lots of new people
coming in and he could see the church was taking less and less focus over their lives.
And then he thought, which is very unusual at the time, him and his wife and he consulted all the
people that used the building and it seemed to appear that a community centre should be created
that still has a church in it, it still has that function, but it's more about the people and the
people at the heart of the community. So it was unusual to think like that in those days, early 60s
and it was his vision that enabled this to happen and you can still feel his spirit, I suppose,
in the way that people... He was a very good man, he sort of, because he was the church man and he
knew the importance of the community and he played a big part in running this community,
also the church altogether, him and his daughter, who I haven't seen for ages.
Did you know her? Yeah, she came up here and I talked to her for the project.
Valerie Martin. Yeah, same. Yeah, very nice. Very nice person, she was very nice, very sweet person and
Mr. Somer himself was a very nice person. We got on very, very well with each other when he was
around here, when he became a mayor as well, then he moved away from here.
And Dorothy, do you remember Dorothy, his wife? Yes, yes, yes, I remember them both very well
and like I said, they moved away and last time I saw was when he came here and I was working the
bus at the end, they added the special night for him at the hotel in town and I was invited to that,
that's when we met last time and Brian, I see him now and again on the street going past, he's okay.
Like I said, there's a lot of people came and gone and it's good memories of them left,
good people and I hope myself like you said, this keeps going but you need people
to run it, you can't just do it with one or two people. Did you, after you were involved with
driving buses and did you have any other sort of involvement with the community in a more,
in a sort of, yeah, like in a community capacity like? Yeah, I've been involved with the mosque,
with our Muslim community but like I couldn't carry on there as well because of my health.
I had nothing to do, I couldn't do much work there because I was just like being a part of the
community, you know, because to be with the youngsters and organize things for them,
meetings, attend the meetings and tell them what to do and what, that's what we do now,
it's only four or five of us, the rest is our youngsters and we just sort of
guide them to running a mosque day-to-day business. Even there, we don't see people turning up to
mosque very much, only on certain occasions like Ramadan, Muharram or if there is a special
event, people come otherwise, there's only a few people go to mosque as well. People are
not into the religion in any community now. I think the people are running away from the
religion and all this
wars going on in Syria, Iran, Iraq and Yemen,
all, what do you call it, there's other, they're fighting each other and
you see young people being killed, children being killed, women running around doing,
it makes me cry when you see all these youngsters and people, what they're doing them for,
what they're bombing them for, what they're killing each other, I don't know why.
In Yemen, this is one of the poorest countries in the world, they got nothing there and yet
they've been bombarded for the last three years, four years maybe, whatever, for what? I don't know,
it's difficult to understand why people are doing this, just killing innocent people
all over the world and the world leaders here,
they don't know what they're doing. It's a shame, shame, it's not difficult to understand things,
too difficult for us to understand. The world could be better if there was a, like in the beginning,
live and let live sort of business, especially these people, these mental people who go around
killing other people, suicide bombers, I mean there's no religion gives you the teaching of
that to go and kill other people, why, why you gain for them? You know what I mean? No, it makes no sense.
It's no good to think. It makes no sense. They kill themselves, they kill other innocent people,
they damage properties, I mean a house is all right for someone like me and you, we might have
buy a house, it takes a lifetime to build that, make their homes into home and somebody just comes
along and blow it up, blow himself up. Why? You know, why, what they gain from that?
Don't understand. They're doing so stupid things they're doing, killing other people for what?
For a few, a few thousand pounds? What would they gain from that? I mean they're not alive to
appreciate that money they got from somebody, whatever it was, dollars, pounds, rupees or whatever
they got from someone who brainwashed them to go and kill other people, what they gain from it?
I don't know. It's very very difficult to understand and I'm sure there's no, 100 percent
there's no religion or no culture will say this is right. Is there anything that you want to add
about making a life in in Main Day or other memories of Community House or where you think
or what we could be doing to sustain what goes on here? Like I said, I, it's difficult for me to
suggest or say because I haven't been involved in anything for ages now.
Most of my time is spent at home and I go to mosque here twice a day but
the interest I had when I was younger age, they all sort of gone. It's not,
I just don't know what to suggest. But I, like I said, I would love to see this place
keep going, keep going and people should run it because it is for the benefit of other people
and they should benefit from it and start letting it run down or close down. It'd be shame.
To see it being closed like the churches or the mosque. It's good to have it running.
I come across some very nice people when I've been doing the project and finding out about their
lives and what they've done. It's amazing. You know, it was an Asian evening then we came
international club, we called it because there was a lot of people. But it was happy days.
You know, people got together, we used to have different nights. You know, we used to meet twice
a day. We used to have different nights, organize different functions on our special days like
play up small dramas or cooking night or something. It was quite nice.
Social media and internet is killing all the relations because people are more interested
in the gossip and what's happening to that person, what's happening, what's he doing,
what she's doing. All these stories, they're interesting and there is still a lot of good
people who are helping out and they're trying to do good in the world. It's not sort of
finished everything, it's still hope.
There people are still doing good and there's good people out there.
I'm glad there's still quite a few things going on.
The government is used to fund it, to run it as a community, house and church.
Then everything is sort of changed, they stopped everything. It is a good cause
for the community and it's keeping the community interested and together.
It's a very helpful place for people around here. It would be a shame to see it go.
It would be a shame to see it go.
My hope and my appeal to the people who have got the resources to keep it going, please keep it going.